---
date: 2024-09-23
tags: 
link:
---

# Kafka Internals

> Apache Kafka is an open-source “distributed” event “streaming platform”. **Distributed** means data is stored in more than one server. **Streaming** means continuous flows of information generated by various sources, then Kafka stores it for some time and then it eventually gets consumed by the receivers


### Topic 
Topic means specific category of events. You can have multiple topics in one cluster

### Partitions
Since the data in a Kafka cluster can infinitely grow, we cannot just rely on one server’s memory and I/O capabilities for overall Kafka’s performance. So, Kafka provides us an option of breaking the topics into partitions (similar to breaking a table into multiple shards).

### Producers
Producers are the external applications that write messages to a Kafka topic. The producer is responsible for taking care of which message should go to which partition

### Consumers
Consumers are the external applications that consume messages from a Kafka topic and then do some work on the events consumed. This work could be like filtering the required events, calling an external service, or even updating a database upon consuming the event.

### Brokers
In Kafka, a **broker** is a server or node responsible for storing and serving data. Brokers manage the exchange of messages between **producers** (which send data) and **consumers** (which read data). They handle the storage of message data in **topics** and manage their partitioning, replication, and delivery.


## WHAT MAKES KAFKA SO FAST AND EFFICIENT

### 1. Sequential I/O

There are two kinds of _disk_ access patterns: random disk I/O and sequential disk I/O. Random I/O is an expensive operation because the mechanical arm of the writer has to move around physically on the magnetic disk to perform reads and writes. However, Sequential I/O is straightforward and only appends data to the end, thus providing less latency (the seek time + disk rotational latency) for performing reads and writes.

## 2. Zero Copy Principle

To understand the zero-copy principle and how it benefits Kafka go to [Zero copy principle](https://vivekbansal.substack.com/i/144471050/zero-copy-principle)

### 📃 Real time use case
## 🔖Reference
* [Kafka Basics](https://vivekbansal.substack.com/p/kafka-basics)
* [What makes Kafka so fast and efficient](https://vivekbansal.substack.com/p/what-makes-kafka-so-fast-and-efficient)
* 
